Orla Agentic AI Working Group                                  Orla Project
Request for Comments: 1                                        December 2025
Category: Informational 


                    RFC 1: Orla Runtime Specification

Status of This Memo

   This document specifies the Orla Runtime for the Orla project
   community.  This memo provides information for the community.  It
   does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of
   this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   This document specifies the Orla Runtime, a single-server runtime
   for Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers that can be meaningfully
   used without configuration.  The runtime automatically discovers
   and executes tools from the filesystem, supports hot reloading via
   signal handling, and provides robust logging and error handling.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction
   2. Requirements
   3. Architecture
   4. Tool Discovery
   5. Tool Execution
   6. Configuration
   7. Hot Reloading
   8. Logging
   9. Scope and Limitations
   10. Security Considerations
   11. References

1. Introduction

   The Orla Runtime is designed to provide a zero-configuration MCP
   server that automatically discovers and executes tools from the
   filesystem.  The primary goal is to enable users to create MCP
   tools by simply placing executable files in a directory, without
   requiring configuration files or manual tool registration.

1.1. Motivation

   Traditional MCP server implementations require explicit
   configuration of each tool, including paths, arguments, and
   metadata.  This creates friction for users who want to quickly
   expose existing scripts and executables as MCP tools.  The Orla
   Runtime eliminates this friction by providing automatic discovery
   and execution.

1.2. Terminology

   Tool: An executable file that can be invoked by the Orla Runtime

   Tool Discovery: The process of automatically finding executable
   files in a directory

   Hot Reload: The ability to reload configuration and tools without
   restarting the server

   MCP Server: A server implementing the Model Context Protocol
   specification

2. Requirements

2.1. Core Requirements

   The Orla Runtime MUST:

   1. Support a single-port MCP server that can be hot reloaded via
      SIGHUP

   2. Automatically discover executable files in a ./tools/ directory

   3. Execute tools using exec.CommandContext or equivalent

   4. Enforce a timeout per request (default: 30 seconds)

   5. Support both HTTP and stdio transport modes

   6. Provide robust logging with JSON format by default

2.2. Command-Line Interface

   The runtime MUST support the following command:

      orla

   This command MUST start an MCP server on a default port (8080) or
   stdio, depending on configuration.  Command-line flags MAY be used
   to override configuration options.

3. Architecture

   The Orla Runtime consists of the following components:

   1. Tool Discovery Engine: Scans the filesystem for executable
      files

   2. Tool Executor: Executes discovered tools with proper timeout
      and cancellation

   3. MCP Server: Implements the MCP protocol using the official Go
      SDK

   4. Configuration Manager: Loads and manages configuration
      (optional)

   5. Signal Handler: Handles SIGHUP for hot reloading

   6. Logger: Provides structured logging with JSON and pretty-print
      modes

4. Tool Discovery

4.1. Discovery Process

   The runtime MUST automatically search for a ./tools/ directory (or
   a directory specified in configuration) and load each executable
   file as a tool.

4.2. Tool Naming

   Tools MUST be named using the filename without extension.  For
   example:

      tools/
        ls.sh        -> tool name: "ls"
        summarize.py -> tool name: "summarize"
        convert      -> tool name: "convert"

4.3. Interpreter Detection

   The runtime MUST infer the interpreter via shebang if present.
   For example:

      #!/bin/bash -> interpreter: "bash"
      #!/usr/bin/env python3 -> interpreter: "python3"
      No shebang -> binary executable

4.4. Executable Detection

   A file is considered executable if it has the executable bit set
   (mode & 0111 != 0).

5. Tool Execution

5.1. Execution Method

   Tools MUST be executed using exec.CommandContext or equivalent,
   which provides:

   - Proper cancellation propagation via context
   - Timeout enforcement
   - Correct stdout/stderr handling

5.2. Timeout

   The runtime MUST enforce a timeout per request.  The default
   timeout MUST be 30 seconds.  This timeout MUST be configurable.

5.3. Input/Output Handling

   stdin:  Piped from MCP request parameters
   stdout: Captured and returned in MCP response
   stderr: Captured and included in MCP response
   exit code: Included in MCP response

5.4. Error Handling

   The runtime MUST handle the following error conditions:

   - Tool not found
   - Tool execution timeout
   - Tool execution failure (non-zero exit code)
   - Tool execution error (system errors)

6. Configuration

6.1. Zero Configuration

   The runtime MUST work without any configuration file.  Default
   values MUST be used when no configuration is provided.

6.2. Configuration File Format

   If a user provides a configuration file, it MUST be in YAML
   format.  YAML was chosen for its readability, support for
   comments, and better human-editing experience compared to JSON.

6.3. Configuration File Location

   The configuration file MAY be specified via command-line argument:

      orla --config orla.yaml

   If no configuration file is specified, the runtime MUST check for
   orla.yaml in the current directory.  If not found, default
   configuration MUST be used.

6.4. Configuration Options

   The configuration file MUST support the following options:

   - tools_dir: Directory containing executable tools (default: ./tools)
   - port: HTTP server port (default: 8080, ignored in stdio mode)
   - timeout: Tool execution timeout in seconds (default: 30)
   - log_format: "json" or "pretty" (default: "json")
   - log_level: "debug", "info", "warn", "error", or "fatal"
     (default: "info")

7. Hot Reloading

7.1. Signal Handling

   The runtime MUST support hot reloading via the SIGHUP signal:

      kill -HUP $(pgrep orla)

7.2. Reload Behavior

   When SIGHUP is received, the runtime MUST:

   1. Reload configuration (if a configuration file was provided)
   2. Re-scan the tools directory
   3. Re-register all discovered tools
   4. Apply changes without restarting the server

7.3. Active Connections

   Hot reloading MUST NOT break existing connections.  Old server
   instances MUST remain active until their connections are closed.
   New connections MUST use the reloaded server instance.

8. Logging

8.1. Log Format

   The runtime MUST log in JSON format by default.  An optional
   pretty-print mode MAY be available for terminal use.

8.2. Log Events

   The runtime MUST log the following events:

   - Tool executions (with duration, success/failure, errors)
   - Request timings
   - Errors
   - Failures
   - Panic recovery

8.3. Log Levels

   The runtime MUST support configurable log levels: debug, info,
   warn, error, fatal.

9. Scope and Limitations

9.1. In Scope

   The following capabilities are within the scope of the Orla
   Runtime:

   1. Invoking tool execution requests
   2. Listing available tools
   3. Prompt to tool execution flow
   4. Cancellation tokens
   5. Error messages

9.2. Out of Scope (Future Work)

   The following features are explicitly out of scope for this RFC
   but may be added in future RFCs:

   1. Routing
   2. Policies
   3. Support for plugins
   4. Queues
   5. Multi-backend support

10. Security Considerations

10.1. Tool Execution

   The runtime executes arbitrary executables from the filesystem.
   Users MUST ensure that:

   - The tools directory contains only trusted executables
   - File permissions are appropriately restricted
   - Tools do not perform unauthorized operations

10.2. Timeout Enforcement

   The timeout mechanism prevents tools from running indefinitely,
   mitigating denial-of-service attacks through long-running tools.

10.3. Input Validation

   Tool arguments are passed directly to executables.  Tools MUST
   validate their own inputs.  The runtime does not perform input
   validation beyond timeout enforcement.

10.4. Network Security

   When using HTTP transport, the runtime implements Origin validation
   as provided by the MCP SDK's StreamableHTTPHandler.  Additional
   authentication and authorization mechanisms are deployment-specific
   and should be implemented at the network layer (e.g., reverse proxy,
   API gateway) or application layer as needed for the deployment
   environment.

11. References

12.1. Normative References

   [MCP]  Model Context Protocol Specification,
          https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification

   [Anthropic]
          Anthropic Desktop Extensions Configuration,
          https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/desktop-extensions

12.2. Informative References

   [Go exec]
          Go os/exec package documentation,
          https://pkg.go.dev/os/exec

   [MCP Go SDK]
          Model Context Protocol Go SDK,
          https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/go-sdk

Author's Address

   Orla Project
   https://github.com/dorcha-inc/orla

